THE BHAGAVAD GITA
=================

Chapter 1: Arjuna Vishada Yoga (The Yoga of Arjuna's Dejection)

Verse 1:
Dhritarashtra said: O Sanjaya, assembled in the holy land of Kurukshetra, eager to fight, what did my sons and the sons of Pandu do?

Verse 2:
Sanjaya said: Having seen the army of the Pandavas arrayed in battle order, King Duryodhana approached his teacher Drona and spoke these words.

Chapter 2: Sankhya Yoga (The Yoga of Knowledge)

Verse 47:
You have a right to perform your prescribed duty, but you are not entitled to the fruits of action. Never consider yourself the cause of the results of your activities, and never be attached to not doing your duty.

Verse 48:
Perform your duty equipoised, O Arjuna, abandoning all attachment to success or failure. Such equanimity is called yoga.

Verse 56:
One who is not disturbed in mind even amidst the threefold miseries or elated when there is happiness, and who is free from attachment, fear and anger, is called a sage of steady mind.

Verse 62:
While contemplating the objects of the senses, a person develops attachment for them, and from such attachment lust develops, and from lust anger arises.

Verse 63:
From anger, complete delusion arises, and from delusion bewilderment of memory. When memory is bewildered, intelligence is lost, and when intelligence is lost one falls down again into the material pool.

Chapter 3: Karma Yoga (The Yoga of Action)

Verse 5:
All men are forced to act helplessly according to the qualities born of the modes of material nature; therefore no one can refrain from doing something, not even for a moment.

Verse 8:
Perform your prescribed duty, for doing so is better than not working. One cannot even maintain one's physical body without work.

Verse 19:
Therefore, without being attached to the fruits of activities, one should act as a matter of duty, for by working without attachment one attains the Supreme.

Verse 27:
The spirit soul bewildered by the influence of false ego thinks himself the doer of activities that are in actuality carried out by the three modes of material nature.

Verse 35:
It is far better to discharge one's prescribed duties, even though faultily, than another's duties perfectly. Destruction in the course of performing one's own duty is better than engaging in another's duties, for to follow another's path is dangerous.

Chapter 4: Jnana Yoga (The Yoga of Knowledge)

Verse 7:
Whenever and wherever there is a decline in religious practice, O descendant of Bharata, and a predominant rise of irreligion—at that time I descend Myself.

Verse 8:
To deliver the pious and to annihilate the miscreants, as well as to reestablish the principles of religion, I Myself appear, millennium after millennium.

Verse 18:
One who sees inaction in action, and action in inaction, is intelligent among men, and he is in the transcendental position, although engaged in all sorts of activities.

Verse 34:
Just try to learn the truth by approaching a spiritual master. Inquire from him submissively and render service unto him. The self-realized souls can impart knowledge unto you because they have seen the truth.

Chapter 5: Karma Sannyasa Yoga (The Yoga of Renunciation of Action)

Verse 10:
One who performs his duty without attachment, surrendering the results unto the Supreme Lord, is unaffected by sinful action, as the lotus leaf is untouched by water.

Verse 18:
The humble sages, by virtue of true knowledge, see with equal vision a learned and gentle brahmana, a cow, an elephant, a dog and a dog-eater.

Chapter 6: Dhyana Yoga (The Yoga of Meditation)

Verse 5:
One must deliver himself with the help of his mind, and not degrade himself. The mind is the friend of the conditioned soul, and his enemy as well.

Verse 6:
For him who has conquered the mind, the mind is the best of friends; but for one who has failed to do so, his mind will remain the greatest enemy.

Verse 35:
The mind is restless, turbulent, obstinate and very strong, O Krishna, and to subdue it, I think, is more difficult than controlling the wind.

Verse 36:
For one whose mind is unbridled, self-realization is difficult work. But he whose mind is controlled and who strives by appropriate means is assured of success. That is My opinion.

Chapter 7: Jnana Vijnana Yoga (The Yoga of Knowledge and Realization)

Verse 3:
Out of many thousands among men, one may endeavor for perfection, and of those who have achieved perfection, hardly one knows Me in truth.

Verse 14:
This divine energy of Mine, consisting of the three modes of material nature, is difficult to overcome. But those who have surrendered unto Me can easily cross beyond it.

Chapter 8: Aksara Brahma Yoga (The Yoga of the Imperishable Brahman)

Verse 5:
And whoever, at the end of his life, quits his body remembering Me alone at once attains My nature. Of this there is no doubt.

Verse 7:
Therefore, Arjuna, you should always think of Me in the form of Krishna and at the same time carry out your prescribed duty of fighting. With your activities dedicated to Me and your mind and intelligence fixed on Me, you will attain Me without doubt.

Chapter 9: Raja Vidya Raja Guhya Yoga (The Yoga of Royal Knowledge and Royal Secret)

Verse 22:
But those who always worship Me with exclusive devotion, meditating on My transcendental form—to them I carry what they lack, and I preserve what they have.

Verse 27:
Whatever you do, whatever you eat, whatever you offer or give away, and whatever austerities you perform—do that, O son of Kunti, as an offering to Me.

Verse 34:
Engage your mind always in thinking of Me, become My devotee, offer obeisances to Me and worship Me. Being completely absorbed in Me, surely you will come to Me.

Chapter 10: Vibhuti Yoga (The Yoga of Divine Glories)

Verse 8:
I am the source of all spiritual and material worlds. Everything emanates from Me. The wise who perfectly know this engage in My devotional service and worship Me with all their hearts.

Verse 20:
I am the Supersoul, O Arjuna, seated in the hearts of all living entities. I am the beginning, the middle and the end of all beings.

Chapter 11: Visvarupa Darshana Yoga (The Yoga of the Vision of the Universal Form)

Verse 7:
O Arjuna, now behold the whole universe—moving and non-moving—gathered in one, in this body of Mine, and whatever else you wish to see.

Verse 54:
My dear Arjuna, only by undivided devotional service can I be understood as I am, standing before you, and can thus be seen directly. Only in this way can you enter into the mysteries of My understanding.

Chapter 12: Bhakti Yoga (The Yoga of Devotion)

Verse 6:
But those who worship Me, giving up all their activities unto Me and being devoted to Me without deviation, engaged in devotional service and always meditating upon Me, having fixed their minds upon Me, O son of Pritha—for them I am the swift deliverer from the ocean of birth and death.

Verse 13:
One who is not envious but is a kind friend to all living entities, who does not think himself a proprietor and is free from false ego, who is equal in both happiness and distress, who is tolerant, always satisfied, self-controlled, and engaged in devotional service with determination, his mind and intelligence fixed on Me—such a devotee of Mine is very dear to Me.

Chapter 13: Kshetra Kshetragna Vibhaga Yoga (The Yoga of Distinction between Field and Knower of Field)

Verse 2:
O scion of Bharata, you should understand that I am also the knower in all bodies, and to understand this body and its knower is called knowledge. That is My opinion.

Verse 27:
One who sees the Supersoul equally present everywhere, in every living being, does not degrade himself by his mind. Thus he approaches the transcendental destination.

Chapter 14: Gunatraya Vibhaga Yoga (The Yoga of the Division of Three Gunas)

Verse 26:
One who engages in full devotional service, unfailing in all circumstances, at once transcends the modes of material nature and thus comes to the level of Brahman.

Chapter 15: Purushottama Yoga (The Yoga of the Supreme Person)

Verse 7:
The living entities in this conditioned world are My eternal fragmental parts. Due to conditioned life, they are struggling very hard with the six senses, which include the mind.

Verse 15:
I am seated in everyone's heart, and from Me come remembrance, knowledge and forgetfulness. By all the Vedas, I am to be known. Indeed, I am the compiler of Vedanta and I am the knower of the Vedas.

Chapter 16: Daivasura Sampad Vibhaga Yoga (The Yoga of Division between Divine and Demoniac)

Verse 1:
The Supreme Personality of Godhead said: Fearlessness; purification of one's existence; cultivation of spiritual knowledge; charity; self-control; performance of sacrifice; study of the Vedas; austerity; simplicity; nonviolence; truthfulness; freedom from anger; renunciation; tranquility; aversion to faultfinding; compassion for all living entities; freedom from covetousness; gentleness; modesty; steady determination; vigor; forgiveness; fortitude; cleanliness; and freedom from envy and from the passion for honor—these transcendental qualities, O son of Bharata, belong to godly men endowed with divine nature.

Chapter 17: Sraddhatraya Vibhaga Yoga (The Yoga of the Division of Three Kinds of Faith)

Verse 3:
O son of Bharata, according to one's existence under the various modes of nature, one evolves a particular kind of faith. The living being is said to be of a particular faith according to the modes he has acquired.

Chapter 18: Moksha Sannyasa Yoga (The Yoga of Liberation and Renunciation)

Verse 46:
By worship of the Lord, who is the source of all beings and who is all-pervading, a man can attain perfection through performing his own work.

Verse 55:
One can understand Me as I am, as the Supreme Personality of Godhead, only by devotional service. And when one is in full consciousness of Me by such devotion, he can enter into the kingdom of God.

Verse 58:
If you become conscious of Me, you will pass over all the obstacles of conditioned life by My grace. If, however, you do not work in such consciousness but act through false ego, not hearing Me, you will be lost.

Verse 65:
Always think of Me, become My devotee, worship Me and offer your homage unto Me. Thus you will come to Me without fail. I promise you this because you are My very dear friend.

Verse 66:
Abandon all varieties of religion and just surrender unto Me. I shall deliver you from all sinful reactions. Do not fear.

Verse 78:
Wherever there is Krishna, the master of all mystics, and wherever there is Arjuna, the supreme archer, there will also certainly be opulence, victory, extraordinary power, and morality. That is my opinion.

This concludes the essential verses and teachings of the Bhagavad Gita, which contains profound wisdom on dharma (duty), karma (action), yoga (union with the Divine), and moksha (liberation).
